Course 3, module 5,
we're going to talk about
the GUID partition table
schema throughout this module.
The GUID partition table
is what you're going to
see on most of your
modern disk today.
It works through
globally unique
identifiers called GUIDs.
A GUID is 128-bit value
and its use to uniquely
identify something.
It's expressed in an
8-4-4-4-12 format
and we can see an
example of that below.
This will overcome the
two terabyte restriction
that Master Boot Record has.
Because remember when we talked
about Master Boot Record,
we talked about our
maximum values.
We only have four bytes to
address them and we can
address them at FF FF FF.
But that restricts us to two
terabytes of addressing.
This will overcome that
two terabyte restriction.
You will still see
a protective Master Boot
Record in sector 0,
and that is there so Windows
does not try to format
the disk because there
is nothing in sector 0,
your file system, a Windows
file system we'll try
to format the drive.
The partition table contains
up to 128 partition entries.
Each of these entries
is 128 bytes long.
Now you might remember back
when we talked about MBR,
we only had 16 bytes
to describe and address
our partitions.
Here we have 128 bytes.
That gives us a lot more room.
Our partition table header
is located in physical sector 1.
There is a backup copy at
the end of the disk and
it uses quiz to identify
each partition,
the type, and also to uniquely
identify the partition.
It's in physical sector 1
because in physical sector
0 we have that protective
aster Boot Record.
This is a visual layout of
how a GPT formatted
disk will look.
You can see right up in sector 0
we have our protective
Master Boot Record.
In sector 1, we have
our GPT header.
In sector 2, we have
our GUID partition table
entries starting in sector 2.
Starting in sector 34,
is where you're going to see
your first actual partition,
your first data
partition that will
contain data and then you'll see
below that the remaining
partitions and then at
the end of the drive we have
a backup copy of the GPT,
the GUID partition table,
and a backup copy
of the GPT header.
The protective master
boot record, like I said,
prevents the operating system
from formatting the drive.
There will be a single entry in
there that will span
the entire drive.
It will account for
all data on the drive,
you'll see a partition type of
EE and it will start with 1,
showing us sector 1,
and then showing us the
maximum value, FF FF FF.
This is what you'll see in
the protective
master boot record.
The GPT header, remember,
is much larger and we have
a signature at the start of
the header and it's
eight bytes long and
it's going to say and
ask you EFI part.
So if you're looking at a disk
and you look in sector 1,
and you see this EFI part,
you know you're looking at
a quick partition schema.
You know you're
looking at a GPT disk.
Now, a logical doubt
it hexadecimal 2,
0, we're going to see
the location of the
backup copy of the GPT.
How we do this in hex
is we start here,
we got out two and
we can see this is
the address of the
backup copy of the GPT.
It's used for recovery purposes.
Now at offset 2,
8 so you go down 1,
2 and over 8.
We can see the start
of the partition area.
This is going to tell us where
the partition area starts.
At offset 3, 0,
this is going to tell us where
the partition area ends.
These are the actual
partitions around the drive.
Now, down at offset 3,
8, we see our disk GUID.
This GUID uniquely identifies
this particular disk.
It is 16 bytes long.
It starts here and goes down.
It's outlined in green.
That's our disk GUID and it is
a unique identifier
for a particular disk.
At offset 48, we
see where the partition table
starts and we can see if we,
all these values are
read little-endian.
Just want to let you know
that we talked about
endianness back at the
beginning of this path.
We can see that that's
going to be two,
which says sector 2.
Each entry, like I said,
is a 128 bytes long.
The beginning of the
entry starting at offset
00 is going to be the
partition type GUID.
What that means is,
what type of partition is it?
Is it a basic data partition?
Is it an EFI system partition?
Is it a reserved partition?
What type of partition is it?
Then down at offset
10 we're going to see
the partitioning GUID.
This GUID uniquely
identifies that partition.
So you'll see partition type
GUIDs which are not unique.
They'll be consistent from
disk to disk and they'll
identify the type of
partition you're looking at,
but the partition GUID is
a unique identifier and
that will become important.
Then at offset to 20,
you're going to see the
start of the partition where
the partition starts
and then at offset 28,
you're going to
see the address of
where the partition ends.
At offset 30, we're going to see
partition flags such as
read-only or hidden,
or other attributes of the
file of that partition.
Then at offset 38,
you're going to see the name
of the partition in Unicode.
Let's take a look here.
These are some common
GUID partition types and
this is shown in hex as
you'll see them on this.
These are converted to GUIDs.
This is in hexadecimal as
you will see it on the disk.
This particular GUID
would be an unused entry.
You can see we have
different types of
Linux Swap, Microsoft Reserved,
Microsoft EFI System
partition and
then different types of
partitions depending
on what partition is on there.
Basic data partition, this
shows the partition types
converted to GUIDs.
We can see we have Microsoft
Reserved, basic data,
Windows Recovery Environment,
just different types
of partitions.
Like I said, the type GUID
is not a unique identifier,
these GUIDS will be consistent
across operating systems.
This slide shows us an example
of a partition table entry.
This would be in single entry
in the GUID partition table.
We can see we have
the first 16 bytes,
and this is the type GUID.
You can see it starts with A2
and ends down here with C7.
This tells us what type of
partition we're looking at.
If we go down one line,
we can now see the
volume GUID and it
starts with 2C and ends with 2A.
This is that unique identifier
that identifies that volume,
that identifies that individual
partition on the drive.
If we go down another line to 30,
we see the logical block address,
the start of the partition
where those particular
partitioning starts.
We can see it's down here
and it starts at LBA 32,768.
Remember these are
read little-endian,
so up here we can
see we've converted
to little-endian and we've
translated that
hexadecimal value to
a decimal value and
now we know where
the start of this
particular partition is.
The next eight bytes,
we can see down here
on disk starts with
FF and ends with 00 for a
length them eight bytes.
This is telling us the
end of that partition,
where the partition ends.
Again, we would convert
it to little-endian,
like we've done up
here and you can see,
and this is the ending LBA and
when we translate
that hex to decimal,
we get the address of
the end of the
logical block address
for that particular partition.
We have the startup
where the partition
starts and we also have
where the partition ends,
which is something we
did not have when we
looked at our MBR
partition entries.
Now we can see the flags.
This particular one, you can
see down here starts with 00,
ends with hexadecimal 80.
That is the flags.
In this particular case,
we would again read
it Little Indian.
This particular flag
says, "No drive letter."
It could say, "Hidden."
It could say, "No drive letter."
It could say any other type of
attribute attributed to
that particular partition.
The remainder here shows us
the name of the partition
in hexadecimal,
and if we were to
translate that to ASCII,
we would see that that was
a basic data partition.
What I'd like you to do
now if you haven't
already done so,
is please download the GPT
VHD from the class drive.
Please go ahead and
attach that through
disk management and open
up Active Disk Editor.
We're going to take a look at
that particular disk
which is formatted GPT,
that VHD in Active Disk Editor,
so we can see what this
all looks like on disk.
We are going to go ahead and
bring up disk management.
I want to make sure
that everybody has
attached the VHD,
so if you have not,
go to "Actions", "Attach VHD",
navigate out to where you saved
your GPT VHD for this class.
Select the VHD, select "Open",
and then you'd go ahead
and attach the VHD.
Once the VHD is attached,
note the drive, note
the disk number,
so when we go to attach it,
we can see it in
Active Disk Editor so
we can select the right disk.
Mine is 15, yours will probably
have a different number.
If we do that one more
time for everybody,
we're going to go to
"Actions", "Attach VHD",
navigate out to where
we saved our class,
"GPT VHD", select it,
select "Open", and we'll
be able to attach it
and just hit "Okay",
and it will attach.
Once you've done that,
note the disk number so we
can find it when we're
using Active Disk Editor.
Let's go ahead and open up
Active Disk Editor now.
Once Active Disk Editor opens,
we're going to select from
the menu here, "Open Disk",
and we're going to go ahead
and select physical drive,
whatever number your
particular GPT VHD
was in Disk Management,
and we're going to click "Open".
Once it opens up,
you can see it here
in physical sector 0,
and you can see that we're
in physical sector 0.
This is our protective
master boot record.
We're going to go ahead
and change our template
to master boot record for
a minute so we can look at that.
Go back in, make sure
you're on offset 0,
right-click, set
template position.
If you don't set it right
from the beginning,
you set it in the middle,
it will not read correctly.
Once we set our template,
we're going to go ahead and look
at our protective
master boot record.
We have one partition entry
which is what we expect to see,
it is not bootable.
Then we would have our
legacy cylinder head sector
and we have our partition
type flag here,
which we can see is EE,
which is what we expect to
see because we know that
a partition type of EE stands
for GUID partition schema.
We're looking at a GPT disk.
Then we would have our
following three bytes
of legacy cylinder head sector,
and we can see the first sector,
like we said, this will
span the whole disk.
It'll go from sector 1
all the way out until
the absolute maximum sectors
it can address using four bytes,
which would be FF, FF, FF.
This is telling me that
this is accounting
for the whole disk.
Remember, we only
have four bytes to
address using master
boot record schema.
With GUID partition table schema,
we have eight bytes to use
for sector addressing,
which will allow us to
address a lot more sectors.
Now, we're going to look
at our EFI part, sector 1.
This is the GPT header
is in sector 1.
We do not have a
template for this.
We're going to go ahead
and go with no template.
We're going to
navigate through here.
In the header, we see
our signature for a
length of eight bytes.
We can see it says EFI part,
and that lets us know
that we're looking at
a GPT partition disk.
Starting down at 20,
and remember, we count one,
two, 20, for a length
of eight bytes.
We're going to open
up our Data Inspector
here and we're going to
expand our window up so we
can see our Data Inspector.
This value is read little-endian,
and we can see right here,
we get the location of our
backup copy of the GPT.
This tells us where
our backup copy of
our grid partition table will be
located at, which sector?
This is the sector that the
backup copy is located in.
If we look at offset
28, and again,
we're starting from the top
of the partition header,
the GPT header, going
down two and over eight.
This is going to be
the start of where
the GUID partition area is.
This is where our
partitions are located.
We can see that it's 34,
which is what we
expect because 34 is
where we're going to see the
start of our partition area,
where the actual partitions
are out on the drive.
Partition 34 would be the
start of our partition area.
Now we're going to look at
offset 30 from the start
of the GPT header,
one, two three.
Again, we're going to look
at a length of eight bytes.
This is going to be the end
of where our partitions are,
the end of the partition area.
Now, we're going to
look at our disk GUID,
which is at offset 38 for
a length of 16 bytes.
This is the disk GUID,
this disk GUID uniquely
identifies this physical disk,
it's the disk GUID.
Now we're going to look at
our next eight bytes
and this tells us the start
of our partition table.
The start of our partition table
is located at sector number 2,
we're going to see the start
of the partition table.
That's what we're
going to look at next.
Remember, we're looking
at eight bytes of data,
8 times 8 is 64,
this is a 64-bit unsigned value.
Looking down at sector 2,
we can see what sector we're in
down here on the
corner, sector 2.
This is the start of our
GUID partition table.
We're going to go to templates,
and we're going to
go to GPT table.
We can see this is the start
of our GUID partition table,
and each of these is a GUID
partition table entry.
They're all 128 bytes long,
and if we were to scroll down,
I could show you there
are a 128 of them.
We're just going to take
a look at the first one.
This tells us what
we're looking at.
This is the partition type
GUID and this is
going to be a length
of 16 bytes and that's
our partition type GUID.
It tells us what type of
partition we're looking at.
Again, it is also
red little-endian.
If we look at that,
we can see it
translates it for us,
it is a Microsoft
Reserved Partition.
If we look here,
this is our unique
partition GUID and again,
this is also 16 bytes
long and it is the
unique partition GUID.
The first one is the type GUID,
which is a Microsoft
Reserved Partition
and the second one is
the unique identifier,
which is the unique
partition GUID.
Continuing down, we
can see where it
starts and it starts
in Sector 34,
which is what we would expect to
see where our first partition is.
Now, we can see where it ends.
It ends in Sector 32,767.
That's the start of our partition
and the end of our partition.
These would be our attributes.
We really don't have any
attribute flags here to
see and then we have the
name of our partition.
We can see that it is a
Microsoft Reserved Partition.
Just point out right here
that the type GUID and
the partition name will not
always match because this is
a system partition and
Microsoft Reserved Partition,
in this case, they just
happened to match,
but they won't always match.
Moving down to our next entry,
we see the type GUID
and we can see it's a
basic data partition.
This is again a unique GUID.
It uniquely identifies this
partition on the drive.
No other partition
on the drive or
subsequently any other drive
should have the same GUID.
This is where our
partition starts.
This is the starting
LBA or starting
sector of this partition
and you can see out
here 32,768 and we
see the end of our
partition over here.
We're getting some big numbers,
2,093,055 and then we see
our attributes which we
do not have any
attribute flag set.
We could have hidden,
we could have different types
of attributes over here but we
do not have any
attribute flags set in
this case and then we have
the name of our partition,
and it's a basic data partition.
Our first partition here
started at Sector 34.
We'll go to "Sector" and
we're going to say 34,
and we'll say "Okay".
We don't really have anything
out here at this point in time.
The next one was our
basic data partition,
which started at 32,768 and
we do see something here.
We can see that our
basic data partition
has a volume boot record.
It is formatted NTFS and
you can see here tells
you sector we are in and that
number matches the number
for our starting sector.
We have our volume boot record,
we don't as of yet
have any data on here,
but we do have a volume
boot record and we can
see that the file system is NTFS.